# Are isogenies for real?

## Thanks [as a pirate]

Ahoy me Hearties! [lifts eye patch?]

Welcome to Real World Crypto 1621. It is me pleasure to give this talk
entitled "Is isogenies for real?", and I would like to takes the
occasion to thanks the organizers for inviting me, and for offering me
crew a good barrel of west indies rum. [cheers]

[cut on glass being banged onto table]

## Intro

[ellitpic curve group law]

So, you all know that contemporary cryptography lives and dies by the
elliptic curve. Elliptic curves give us all we could hope for: a hard
discrete logarithm problem, reasonable speed, compact parameters, well
understood side-channel countermeasures, and even pairings.

But all good things must come to an end, and you all have heard of the
menace looming over elliptic curves and discrete logarithm in
general...

...the quantum computer [cut to QC with cat]

[cut to live scene: eiffel tower]

You have probably heard about NIST's post-quantum competition, and the
various families of encryption and signature schemes supposed to be
resitant to quantum attacks. In pole position we have Lattices and
Codes for encryption, Lattices and Multivariate Polynomial Systems for
signatures.

But I'm here today to talk about another family that's been making the
buzz recently. No, it's not the Kardashians. I'm talking about isogeny
based cryptography.

When we talk about post-quantum isogeny schemes, we mainly talk about
two distinct but related families of schemes and security assumptions.
To my left, SIDH: the key exchange and related schemes based on the
full supersingular graph. To my right, CSIDH. Yes, this thing has to
be pronounced sea-side. The family of schemes based on the action of a
quadratic imaginary ideal class group on the subset of supersingular
elliptic curves defined over a prime field.

[timeline]

CSIDH is a direct descendant of the very first isogeny based schemes:
the family of schemes based on the Hard Homogenous Spaces framework of
Couveignes.  Couveignes' work was not published at the time, and it's
only 10 years later that isogeny based cryptography really took
up. First, Charles, Goren and Lauter introduced supersingular isogeny
graphs in cryptography to construct collision resistant hash
functions. Then Rostovtsev and Stolbunov rediscovered Couveignes'
scheme, and were the first to suggest that it may be quantum safe.

The SIDH key exchange only came some years later, as a sort of mash-up
of the ideas of Couveignes, Rostovtsev and Stolbunov on one hand, and
of Charles, Goren and Lauter on the other hand. Its importance lies in
being the first efficient isogeny based key exchange scheme, and it is
currently the only isogeny-based candidate in the third round of
NIST's post-quantum competition, under the name of Supersingular
Isogeny Key Encapsulation, or SIKE.

Since a few years, the field of isogeny based crypto is booming.  The
recent discovery of CSIDH, the other efficient isogeny-based key
exchange, has been an amazing catalyst for the development of the
field.  A considerable effort has gone in designing efficient isogeny
based signatures, something that is only coming to fruition now.

Let me stress, now, that SIDH and CSIDH give rise to two separate and
incomparable families of isogeny based schemes. To take an example
from the lattice world, they are as related as NTRU and RingLWE,
possibly even less. Each has its own strengths and weaknesses, which I
am going to discuss next.

In the meantime, to complicate things, several other interesting
isogeny protocols have emerged which are neither based on SIDH nor on
CSIDH. I'll just mention here Galbraith, Petit and Silva's signature
scheme, and more importantly its successor SQISign, which sets a
record for combined signature and public key size in the arena of
post-quantum signatures.


## Isogenies and isogeny graphs

Let's start from the beginning: what is an isogeny?

[Hand: morphisms]

Isogenies are morphisms of elliptic curves. That is, algebraic
functions from a curve to another one that preserve the group
structure.

By "algebraic", I mean that isogenies are defined by ratios of
polynomials. The higher the degree of the polynomials, the more
complex, somehow, the isogeny.

Preserving the group law means exactly what you would expect: isogeny
of A plus isogeny of B equals isogeny of A plus B. Said otherwise,
isogenies and scalar multiplication commute on the elliptic curve
points.

We say two elliptic curves are n-**isogenous** if there exists an
isogeny of degree n between them. Isogenies are as fundamental to the
study of elliptic curves, as matrices are to vector spaces. They
basically control all algebraic properties of elliptic curves: their
group structure, their endomorphism ring, their pairings. Take as
evidence the famous Serre-Tate theorem: two elliptic curves are
isogenous over a finite field if and only if they have the same number
of points... It makes you wonder why no one told you about them
before, doesn't it?

In my view, isogeny based crypto starts the moment you stop looking at
a single elliptic curve and its isogenies, and enlarge your
perspective to consider **all** elliptic curves with isogenies between
them. This is what we call **isogeny graphs**, and, in truth, there is
more than one cryptographically interesting way to construct
them. Indeed, the first big difference between CSIDH and SIDH is the
kind of isogeny graph involved.

[Anim: isomorphisms]

But first, we need to get something out of the way. **All** elliptic
curves is really too much, as they contain too much redundant
information. Instead, we like to classify elliptic curves by their
isomorphism class. An isomorphism of elliptic curves is just a linear
transformation that maps points one-to-one, and you may know that the
j-invariant classifies elliptic curves up to isomorphism.

[Anim: SSingular]

Usually in an isogeny graph, vertices are j-invariants, representing
isomorphism classes of elliptic curves; edges are isogenies between
the curves, up to composition with isomorphisms. In a typical graph,
we also put some constraints on the degree of the isogenies. For
example, the isogeny graph used in SIDH has for vertices all
isomorphism classes of supersingular elliptic curves, and for edges
all isogenies of degree either 2 or 3.

[Anim: Cayley]

In CSIDH, instead, the vertices are the isomorphism classes of
supersingular elliptic curves **defined over a prime field with p
elements**; the restriction to the prime field is important. The edges
are all isogenies of degree taken from a fixed list of small prime
numbers, for example all primes from 3 to 400 something.

[Anim: SIDH vs CSIDH]

From now on, I shall call these two kinds of supersingular graphs the
*SIDH graph* and the *CSIDH graph*, even when they are used in
situations unrelated to both SIDH and CSIDH. Other names you will hear
are the *full* supersingular, and the *F_p-restricted* supersingular
graph. These two graphs pervade modern isogeny-based crypto, and
underpin a number of different security assumptions used to build
protocols.

[INSERT ANIMATION HERE]

But before moving to the security assumptions, a word about
non-supersingular graphs. Why do isogeny cryptographers show so little
love for ordinary isogeny graphs? If you come from classical
cryptography, you may know that supersingular elliptic curves are
considered insecure for ECC, so, why is it the other way around for
isogenies? First, the security of classical ECC is unrelated to that
of isogeny based cryptography. Second, the original
Couveignes-Rostovtsev-Stolbunov proposal was in fact based on
isogenies of ordinary curves.  Unfortunately isogeny computations
between ordinary curves are currently too slow for cryptographic
applications, whereas supersingular curves open the way to a few
crucial algorithmic tricks that make all the efficiency of
supersingular isogeny based crypto.

Ordinary isogeny based crypto is not impossible. It's just that we're
not there yet... and we may never be.


## Isogeny problems

[Anim: path finding]

So, if the security of isogenies is not based on the discrete
logarithm problem, what is it based on? Informally we say that all
these schemes are based on the hardness of **path finding** in isogeny
graphs; but in reality there is a great variety of different path
finding problems involved.

The *ideal* path finding problem looks something like this: given an
isogeny graph of elliptic curves over some finite field GF(p), given
two random isomorphism classes of elliptic curves in the graph, find a
path in the isogeny graph joining them.

Unfortunately, only CSIDH and the associated signature schemes are
based on the pure form of this problem, the isogeny graph in question
being the CSIDH graph, of course. We shall see, however, that being
based on a clean path finding problem does not make CSIDH immune to
powerful quantum attacks.

SIDH is based on a more constrained problem in the full supersingular
graph. Indeed, there, the two curves are not taken at random from the
set of vertices, but at a rather short distance from one another in
the graph: about half the typical distance of two random
vertices. Even more concerning, both SIDH and SIKE need to publish
more information than just the start and the arrival curve: together
with these, comes information on how the secret isogeny acts on some
subsets of points of the elliptic curves, something that we call the
**torsion point images**. We currently do not know how to exploit this
additional information to break SIKE, but attacks exploiting the same
kind of information against hypothetical variants of SIKE do exist.

Yet another problem is needed to prove the security of the
Charles-Goren-Lauter hash function. Here, instead of looking for
paths, we look for cycles in the isogeny graph. More precisely, given
a starting elliptic curve in the graph, collision resistance of the
hash function reduces to finding a cycle passing through the
curve. Second preimage resistance is similar: given an isogeny path
from some curve to some other curve, find an alternate path between
the two. The alternate path problem is also crucial for the security
of some other non post-quantum isogeny based schemes I shall mention
later.


## From ECDH to CSIDH to SIDH

But, so, how hard is the path finding problem, exactly? How does one
build key exchange on top of it.

[Anim: Cayley graph]

To understand it, we may build a graph that relates to discrete
logarithms in a group. Let's take an elliptic curve with group of
prime order q, and let's create a graph whose vertices are all the
points of the curve, except the point at infinity. Now we connect two
points A and B with an edge whenever A = 2B. We may do the same with A
= 3B, A = 5B, etc.

Now, given a generator G and another point H, finding a path from G to
H gives a solution to the discrete logarithm of H to base G. If the
graph is well connected enough, shortest paths between points will be
of polynomial length, and we may thus say that the path finding
problem in this graph is equivalent to the discrete logarithm problem
of the elliptic curve.

Does this graph look familiar? Yes, it has exactly the same structure
as the CSIDH graph. So what do these two graphs have in common?

Mathematicians call these Cayley graphs, or more seldom Schreier
graphs.  I shall prefer the second name because it does better
describe the CSIDH graph.  In this example we have two groups at play:
the group of points of the elliptic curve, and the group Z/q of the
scalar multipliers. We say that Z/q **acts** on the points by scalar
multiplication.

[INSERT ANIMATION HERE]

But who is in play in the CSIDH graph? The vertices are, as we know,
isomorphism classes of elliptic curves. Definitely not a group: you
can't add two isomorphisms classes! Ok, where is the group then? A
venerable theory, called the theory of Complex Multiplication, tells
us that a group is lurking behind the CSIDH graph. It is not Z/q, it
is not the group of points of an elliptic curve, it is rather a **class
group of an imaginary quadratic number field**.

Don't worry, you don't need to know what an imaginary quadratic number
field or what a class group is to use CSIDH. The important point is
that we again have what mathematicians call a **group action**, of a
group (the class group) onto a set (the set of isomorphism classes of
supersingular curves).

[Anim: Key Exchange]

Given a group action, how do you do key exchange? It's very simple,
and it mimics classic diffie hellman. Alice and Bob each take random
paths in the Schreier graph. They exchange the arrival vertices, then
re-apply the "same" random paths starting from each other's vertex.
Here the "same" means the same element of the class group that's
acting on the supersingular set. The magic of group actions guarantees
that Alice and Bob secretly land on the same vertex, which they can
use as shared secret.

But, if path finding is equivalent to discrete log, and if discrete
log is broken by Shor's quantum algorithm, why is CSIDH not broken
too? Somehow, the strength of CSIDH comes from the fact the vertices
of the graph do not form a group: unlike elliptic curve points, you
can't meaningfully add them together. This is sufficient to stop
Shor's algorithm, as far as we know.

[Hand: tabulation of algorithms]

But the class group acting on the vertex set is also the **weakness**
of CSIDH. Indeed, if Shor's algorithm does not apply, a different
quantum algorithm due to Kuperberg does apply! Kuperberg algorithm has
subexponential complexity exp(sqrt(log q)), it thus does not count as
a total break for CSIDH. It nevertheless causes quite some headaches
to cryptographers when they try to quantify its quantum security.
Indeed you may have seen a stream of papers in the last few Eurocrypt
conferences claiming wildly different security levels for the same
CSIDH parameters. Research on the exact quantum security of CSIDH is
still a very active area, and a consensus has yet to emerge.

[Anim: many actions]

And SIDH? Well, you may have noticed that the SIDH graph looks quite
different. Indeed, for SIDH there is no longer a group action on the
set of isomorphism classes of supersingular curves. In truth, there
are lots of group actions by different class groups on different
subsets of the vertex set. When they interact together, these
different group actions get jumbled together to an extent that is
impervious to Kuperberg algorithm. Indeed, the best known algorithm
for solving the path finding problem in the SIDH graph has
**exponential** complexity!

[Anim: SIDH]

But it's not only Kuperberg's algorithm that gets confused in the
process. The Diffie-Hellman-like key exchange we sketched previously
also breaks down completely. To recover some algebraic structure, and
ensure the existence of commuting paths for Alice and Bob, the groups
of points of the elliptic curves, which were completely forgotten in
CSIDH, come to our rescue in SIDH. I am not going to explain here how
SIDH ensures that Alice and Bob's paths commute, there are excellent
tutorials for that, like "Supersingular isogeny key exchange for
beginners" by Craig Costello. Suffice to say that this trick does not
come for free, as Alice and Bob need now to exchange more information,
which makes public keys slightly larger, and more importantly
potentially paves the way to specialized attacks.

In conclusion, no isogeny is perfect.

[Hand: tabulation]

SIDH aka SIKE has better understood quantum security, but is based on
a somewhat ad hoc path finding problem, which is a bit concerning. It
is clearly the more mature system, and a good fit for NIST's
post-quantum competition, but has its flaws and limitations.

CSIDH is at the same time older and younger than SIDH. Older because
of the original idea by Couveignes, and younger because of the recent
move to supersingular isogeny graphs. Its quantum security is a
complicated matter to say the least, and it would probably be a bad
match for NIST's competition (and it's not in it, anyway).

But CSIDH is also **the only** credible instantiation of a
post-quantum cryptographic group action!  No post-quantum construction
comes as close to old Diffie-Hellman as does CSIDH, and for this
reason CSIDH is capable of advanced protocols which are nearly
infeasible for lattices or codes, etc. Most notably, CSIDH is **the
only** efficient post-quantum non-interactive key exchange, a
fundamental component in non-interactive protocols such as those found
in the Signal messaging app.


## Comparison to other post-quantum candidates

[Anim: size/speed chart]

Since we mentioned codes and lattices, how do isogeny based schemes
fare in comparison to other post-quantum candidates?

It is probably well known that key size is the main marketing argument
for isogenies. SIKE has the smallest public keys and ciphertexts among
all NIST candidates in each category. On the other hand, SIKE is
notoriously an order of magnitude slower than other candidates, owing
to the large number of elliptic curve operations it needs to perform.

This puts SIKE on the opposite of the spectrum compared to code-based
schemes, which are very fast but have very large keys. Lattice-based
schemes, as usual, come out as the most versatile of all post-quantum
encryption schemes.

CSIDH was originally instantiated with even smaller keys than SIDH,
but progress in understanding Kuperberg's algorithm may bump this
sizes to levels similar to SIDH. It is currently slightly, possibly
unavoidably, slower than SIDH, and increasing key sizes can only widen
the gap.

When we move to signatures, the picture becomes bleak. SIDH signatures
involve several hundreds of repetitions of SIDH, they are thus both
slow and large. CSIDH signatures allow for some compromises in terms
of size, but are even terribly slower than SIDH signatures.

That is, unless one is able to compute the order of the class group
acting on the CSIDH graph! This may come a bit as a surprise: I told
you that we know there is a class group acting on the set of
supersingular isomorphism classes, but I didn't tell you that this
group is more or less hard to compute!

It turns out that computing its order is doable in sub-exponential
classical time, or polynomial quantum time. More crucially, having
done this precomputation, CSIDH signatures can be sped-up by a
significant amount, producing a decent signature scheme named
CSI-FiSh. The problem with this strategy is that the pre-computation
is very expensive, or even undoable for larger parameter sets. As long
as we don't have quantum computers, that is!

[excise group actions paper]

[Anim: chart]

When we compare with NIST candidates, it looks like isogeny-based
signatures are not at advantage. But there is hope! We recently
discovered SQISign, a new kind of isogeny signature, based on SIDH
graphs but exploiting completely different algorithms. SQISign is
currently quite slow for signing, but has acceptable verification
time, and remarkably small signatures and public keys, comparable in
size to RSA signatures.

## What are isogenies good for?

[Nobody cares meme]

Small keys, small keys, we got small keys here. See, nobody cares.

[Just speaking in front of white wall, no pirate]

Well, yes, small keys are cool, but do you really need them? Let's
look at NIST's call. Here we're talking public key encryption and
signatures, so the first application that comes to mind is TLS.

[cloudflare graphs]

Now, you may remember the Ostrich and the Turky experiment run by
Cloudflare and Google. Over the course of three months, the two
companies implemented in Google's Chrome browser and in Cloudflare's
server infrastructure two TLS extensions featuring hybrid key
agreements based on NTRU or SIKE. They measured the latency of the TLS
handshake using each variant, and found out that the overhead of the
lattice-based scheme is barely noticeable, whereas SIKE adds a
considerable amount of latency.

But they also observed an inversion of the trend in the right tail of
the distribution, where the slowest TLS connections are found.  They
attributed this to SIKE's smaller keys, which are more likely to fit
in the typical Maximum Transmission Unit of TCP packets, and are thus
less affected by packet lossess.

[Speaking in front of wall]

NIST selection of SIKE as an alternate candidate sends a clear signal:
for the most typical use cases, isogenies are unlikely to be the
preferred choice: too new and a tad too slow.  There is the "eggs in
the basket" argument, of course: if lattices or codes prove to be
broken, isogenies may save the day, and so far they've proven to be
quite sturdy against cryptanalysis. But NIST decision is also an
acknowledgement that there may be specifc scenarios where isogenies
have the edge over other candidates.

So what would be a good use of SIDH? Some say small keys are good for
IoT, where small storage and low bandwidth are the norm. But the high
energy cost is even more problematic there, and available RAM is also
an obstacle on contemporary IoT platforms. Without dedicated hardware
acceleration, I doubt SIDH could ever be used on low power devices.

Other applications where speed is not paramount, but size is, could
benefit more from SIDH. For example, some fancy encrypted storage.
Blockchains come to mind, obviously, however the main focus there is
on signatures rather than encryption. This is where SQISign could
actually play a much bigger role, if we can gain more confidence in
its security assumption in the coming years.

Can CSIDH be a better choice than SIDH for any of these applications?
I doubt it. For one, it's even slower than SIDH, and this appears to
be an intrinsic limitation of the algorithm. Secondly, the
uncertainity around its quantum security makes it not ready for
production yet.  I simply do not believe CSIDH will ever be preferable
to SIDH for encryption or key exchange, even though it relies on a
qualitatively cleaner security assumption.

[TRL chart]

So, what is CSIDH good for? If we speak in terms of Technology
Readiness Level, SIDH is at Level 6, whereas CSIDH is only at Level 2.
So, don't expect to see CSIDH in the Real World in the next 10 years.
But where CSIDH shines is in its flexibility!  SIDH is a rather rigid
system, from which it is difficult to obtain anything else than
encryption or key exchange.  Codes, well, we're still struggling to
make signatures with them, althoug there's recently been some
interesting developments.  Lattices are obviously very flexible, but
terrible in practice at some tasks, e.g., threshold schemes.

[screencap: group actions]

CSIDH, in contrast, is the only known instantiation of a quantum safe
cryptographic group action, a cryptographic tool close enough to
discrete logarithms that several classic protocols can be easily
translated to it, with essentially no knowledge of isogenies. I
already made the example of non-interactive key exchange, a
fundamental component of many non-interactive protocols such as OPTLS
or Signal, but there is also oblivious transfer, oblivious
pseudorandom functions, threshold signatures, and many more. I invite
you to read "Cryptographic Group Actions and Applications", by
Alamati, Montgomery, Patranabis and myself to learn more about CSIDH
and cryptographic group actions in general.

In synthesis, I believe that for the moment CSIDH is still a
cryptographer's toy, unfit for the NIST post-quantum call. But keep an
eye on it for amazing applications, more advanced than just encryption
or signatures.

[anim: graph walk]

Finally, I need to spend a few words on a topic unrelated to
post-quantum security. Remember those random walks in the isogeny
graph? It turns out they have another interesting feature: evaluating
an isogeny chain is a strictly sequential operation. Isogeny walks
used in post-quantum schemes are typically rather short: a couple of
hundreds of steps. But what if we take much longer walks, say
thousands or millions of steps? Then we have an operation that takes a
predictably long amount of time, similar to repeated squaring in a
group.

[screencaps]

Combining this idea with classical pairings, we obtain interesting
time-delay primitives such as Verifiable Delay Functions, Time-lock
puzzles, and a recently introduced one called Delay Encryption.  These
primitives have several applications to distributed protocols:
randomness beacons, leader elections, auctions, voting, and are thus
very attractive for, guess what? Blockchains!

Now, these primitives are also quite challenging to implement, but I
wouldn't be surprised if, along with SIKE, they were among the first
to be deployed in the real world.

In summary, isogeny based cryptography is a very rich field, with a
variety of different assumptions and constructions which can hardly be
summarized in a single talk. Some of these, such as SIKE, are already
road tested, and essentially ready for production. Others require more
research, but may prove to be invaluable to some advanced
applications. I hope that this quick overview gave you a fair idea of
what isogenies can offer, and will motivate you to learn more about
them.

[pirate]

Aye! The matey knows his stuff! I always says a pirate worth its salt
must know some good old fashined misoginy.

Sail oh, and see ye at the next pirate conference!
